# Idea


Here's an idea I would like to play with if only I had more time. If anyone
out there is interested and decides to play with it, or if you want to pick my
brain, tell me.

I was thinking about the shortage of programmers and tech workers and the
shortage of most other kinds of employment these days. It seems to me that if
good technical education were more accessible, a lot of people would be a lot
better off.

So why not create a system to automate the education of people in programming?
That would be the easiest: teaching people how to program automatically. Just
set up online lessons with live teachers at first. Have an "ideal" solution
for each assignment. Let the teacher grade projects by hand at first.

As the teacher teaches and grades, let there be an algorithm monitoring and
recording all the questions and answers students ask during and after
lectures. Let it also record the errors made in assignments and the teacher's
notes when corrections are made. Let the algorithm suggest responses to the
teacher based on past answers given. Let students directly question the
algorithm for information given in response to questions during and after
lessons, and for questions regarding assignments they've already completed.

Eventually the algorithm would be able to take over the teaching of most of
the classes. Students should be encouraged to help each other after each
lesson as well, to answer questions the algorithm could not. These too could
be used to enhance the algorithm, though they would need to be screened for
appropriateness.

The project should be supported by donations and volunteers. Those who
graduate from the program in particular should be encouraged to help the new
students that come after them. This could mean participating in after-lesson
talks or simply responding to questions the algorithm can't answer yet.

