# A Just Cryptocurrency


## An Ideological Basis

  
I like Bitcoin a lot, but I kinda see it as the latest development in our
ongoing conversation about what currency should be rather than as the final
word in it. One of the problems I see with Bitcoin, aside from the mining
centralization problem, is the wealth centralization problem. In particular,
capitalism tends toward the accumulation of most of the world's wealth in the
hands of a few.

I'm not here to split hairs over "true capitalism" versus "crony capitalism,"
so lower your hackles if I've raised them, take a deep breath, and see if I'm
not entirely full of shit here. In my opinion, power is power, and an excess
of any one kind makes it easier to obtain any other form one desires,
including violent power. The difference between "true capitalism" and "crony
capitalism" is only one of age. "True capitalism" naturally evolves into
"crony capitalism" given enough time due to the fungibility of power in
general. In other words, the wealth gap, while problematic, is only one aspect
of a larger problem: the problem of incredibly large power imbalances.

Part of the problem with these power imbalances, part of what gives *rise* to
them in the first place, is that power, once given, can be *incredibly* hard
to take back. We have a legal system that's supposed to protect the
disempowered in the event that someone abuses the power they've been given.
But in practice, power is still power. Power gets things done. Power can
subvert, and has subverted, our legal system. So we end up with a dynamic
where power is distributed unevenly and where it gets wielded to divert more
power into the hands of the already powerful at the expense of those who lack
the power to protect themselves.

It's a meat-grinder-like dynamic that contributes toward downwards mobility
for the exploited and upward mobility for the exploiters. If you don't feel it
yet, you will soon enough. As a city, and even as a country, we have had it
relatively good so far.

This is a large problem and the cryptocurrency I'm about to propose here won't
solve all of it. Power comes in many forms. But I think blockchain-based
cryptocurrency gives us the chance to at least take a step toward solving the
problem where currency is concerned. Historically this power dynamic has only
been broken through violence: whether the hard violence of revolution or the
softer violence of reform. I think we have a shot at breaking it this time
with the even softer "violence" of code and marketplace competition.

## The Cryptocurrency Itself

  
I want to merge currency and democracy. I want to make a currency that gives
each person an equal voice in what is *done* with their "power-as-currency."
Or, I suppose more accurately, a say in what is *not* done with it.

In particular, I want to create a cryptocurrency that hooks into a
cryptographic proof of physical identity and grants a certain number of
currency units per person. The currency units get mixed with each transaction,
maintaining anonymity, but each participant keeps a secret key that can be
used to refer to any transactions "containing" their tokens. They can use that
secret key to issue a transaction barring any other participant, or set of
participants, from using their tokens. They can also use the secret key to
remove any bars they've previously placed in the event the censured actor
satisfactorily makes amends for whatever they had done to earn the censure in
the first place.

Of course, the dynamic of allowing anonymous transactions while also allowing
participants to issue transactions referring back to their original "tokens"
could prove hopelessly complicated and difficult to implement. A simpler
possibility would be to just set up a system where the amount of currency
within the total coin base available to a participant is attenuated by the
percentage of participants that have them blacklisted. So if I'm blacklisted
by 20% of the population, then 20% of the coin base is chosen at random and
made unavailable to me. I will not then be able to receive coins belonging to
the 20% set or send coins belonging to that set until I make amends with those
who have blacklisted me and get them to remove me from their blacklists.

This would allow smaller economic actors to collectively take meaningful
punitive action against powerful, misbehaving actors without regard to how
large those actors are. Because of the "voting" system in which every
participant has an equal say, actors who harm a large percentage of the
population will subsequently find any power held within this cryptocurrency
stripped from them, proportionate to the amount of infamy they manage to earn
for themselves.

## A Keynesian Addendum

  
I would be pleasantly surprised if this addendum meets with approbation, but I
would like to at least propose it.

In my opinion, this currency should also enact a saner version of inflation
wherein 2% of the monetary base gets issued to all participants equally each
year, with each block containing some small chunk of the yearly amount. This
would make economic power within the system tend toward equality (in the
absence of any other economic actions), as opposed to the current system's
inflation scheme which favors those closest to "the money spigot." This
inflationary scheme could also be considered a sort of "basic universal
income," depending on the specifics of the economy the cryptocurrency finds
itself in and on the overall size of the money base.

## Criticisms? Ideas?

  
Please let me know if you have any criticisms or ideas. This idea is very
rough at the moment and I'm looking to test it and improve it via discussion
before I take it any further. This is to be a collaborative enterprise
involving as many minds as possible as early as possible and as often as
possible.

