# Monetization v.s. Decentralization
_Written in response to [/u/robboywonder's comment on
/r/bitcoin](http://www.reddit.com/r/Bitcoin/comments/2nab2a/western_union_filed_a_copyright_claim_against_me/cmbu87h)
expressing a wish for peer-to-peer social media. Reproduced here because it
very nicely expresses my feelings on this subject at the moment. Please
express your agreement or disagreement in the comments! I'd love to have a
real debate over these notions bouncing around in my head._

There have been a lot of attempts at federated social media solutions. I think
that approach is played out. As soon as I finish the paid work I'm currently
doing, maybe even before then, I plan on beginning work on a true peer-to-peer
social network. I've been reading and researching the subject for a few months
now and feel I've just about got a good enough grip on things to take a decent
swing at it.

The technology, as it turns out, isn't all that complicated. Monetizing these
endeavors is really the hard part. Most money-seeking endeavors rely on
creating chokepoints, or points of centralization. A service that respects you
as a consumer and that protects your privacy by making it impossible for the
service's stewards to do otherwise cannot engage in these tactics. Thus they
rely on people consentually, voluntarily giving up some of their resources and
currency to help the project.

Even blockchain-based projects rely on creating a chokepoint to monetize
themselves. Access to the blockchain requires purchasing a token, which these
days often comes directly from the developers via an "IPO." The blockchain
itself is decentralized, which puts it a step ahead of other money-seeking
endeavors, but it still technically constitutes a point of centralization that
can cause problems for people's privacy if too much is entrusted to it. You
can't really have forward-secrecy, for example, if all the messages ever
distributed in a system are recorded for all eternity in a blockchain. Or even
if all the messages get distributed to all the nodes in the network, since an
attacker can then keep a private record of those messages.

It's certainly possible to achieve a degree of privacy on the blockchain, but
for purposes of keeping messages secure, I have come to believe that the model
is wholly insufficient in itself. For it to really work, it has to pair with
some form of non-global messaging. Some form of side-channeling.

So monetization as it is traditionally done on the Internet and
decentralization seem to be fundamentally set against each other. You can't
have one and the other. If I start a peer-to-peer project and it gains
traction, the only chance it'll have of continuing into the future is if I can
monetize it via side channels. If I can make enough through donations,
speaker's fees, and selling swag, then I will be able to stay on it
indefinitely. If not, I'll eventually be forced to give up the reins to other
volunteers (if I've managed to attract any by then) while I re-enter the
workforce to replenish my reserves.

These are, of course, only my opinions as of this moment. I admit I haven't
dug yet into Bitmessage as much as I'd like to have, so I reserve the right to
be proven wrong and to change my opinion on blockchains in particular. It
feels weird that I feel like I need to say this, but the Internet is very good
at preserving opinions forever and then resurrecting those opinions at the
least possibly opportune times. Opinions change, and I would be quite happy to
be proven wrong on anything I've written here.

