# Centralization is a power relation


[A
thread](https://www.reddit.com/r/ethereum/comments/4t6pmi/f2pool_is_setting_a_dangerous_precedent_by/)
on r/ethereum has lead me to once again realize the disconnect between my
perception of the Ethereum community and its reality. The first time this
happened for me was in the wake of the "The DAO" debacle. I was unperturbed by
the hack, having expected exactly that sort of thing to happen with
regularity, and yet others seemed surprised and distressed. This was not a
inevitability they were prepared for, it seemed.

"But the code had been audited! It had been open source for months!" Well,
yeah. [Talk to OpenSSL about that sort of
assumption.](http://arstechnica.com/security/2016/01/high-severity-bug-in-
openssl-allows-attackers-to-decrypt-https-traffic/) "But there were people
whose faces I recognize and trust somehow tangentially involved!" That doesn't
mean anything. You're operating under the wrong paradigm if you think that
matters one jot. "Social proof" is no proof, especially not of security or
even fitness to purpose.

Again, I'd assumed all of this going into Ethereum. I expected the ecosystem
that emerged to be forged and tempered in the blood and tears of investors
who'd lost their wealth to bad decisions and imperfect software. I assumed
this was obvious enough that everyone else coming in would see it the same
way. Apparently not, as even the Ethereum Foundation is pushing for a hard
fork to undo the poor decisions of many naive investors, coy though they may
be trying to play. My perception had deviated from reality. Being who I am,
rather than simply correct my perception and move on with my life, I'm writing
this post in an attempt to correct this deviation via an exchange of ideas,
starting with this ones in this blog post. One of us is bound to yield, of
course, but I'm not throwing in the towel without even so much as a whimper.

There's been some fast-and-loose wordplay which has led some people to
conflate decentralization with democracy. Let me be clear: decentralization is
not democracy. Democracy is merely centralization tempered by at least
pretending to care about what the governed want. Once the governing apparatus
makes its choice, it's enforced on all subjects whether or not they wish it.
Decentralization and centralization relate to the distribution of power held.

Repeated: centralization and decentralization of power is only meaningful when
applied to real, actual power. Not imagined power. Not "power to the people,"
"let's take a vote on it and hope the powerful respect our wishes" faux power.
Power held by oneself as a simple, mechanical fact. Ethereum does allow for
democratic governance mechanisms, of course, and I won't fault someone for
thinking these are decentralized: after all, the governing apparatus is
ostensibly controlled by the rules of the network rather than a group of
humans, and that tends to be somewhat easier for crypto nerds like myself to
stomach. But inasmuch as the decisions made by the group are enforced on the
members, the power of the democratic smart contract is just as centralized as
its meatspace counterpart.

Repeating that again: the degree to which a system may be considered
centralized or decentralized is determined by the degree to which your
personally held power remains within your control. "Power" is an abstract
concept, so let's make it concrete: when you, as a miner, choose to mine with
a mining pool, you are investing your power into a center which someone else
controls. The mining pool itself is a centralizing force. Your relationship
with the pool is centralized for as long as you opt to keep your rig pointed
at the pool. You have lent your power as a miner to that pool.

If the mining pool decides to do something with your power that you don't
agree with, you can get angry. You can complain. You can take your hash power
elsewhere. But you can't claim that the mining pool taking action without
consulting you was centralizing. Their action was a _symptom_ of the
relationship _you_ willfully entered into, and _your_ decision to enter into
it was what created a centralized power relation.

An aside: decentralization is great, but sometimes centralization does make
sense. It tends to be tons more efficient than decentralization for
decentralization's sake. Sometimes it's the right decision. The trick is in
figuring out when it is and when it isn't. Having a reputation system, perhaps
like [the Web of Trust](https://www.gnupg.org/gph/en/manual/x547.html), maybe
even [the Bitcoin OTC Web of Trust](https://bitcoin-otc.com/trust.php) until
such time as we Ethereans can get such a system of our own together, helps a
bit with making decisions with regards to who to trust about what. Combining
such a system with cryptographically signed statements and depending on those
instead of rumor and implicit, perhaps-imagined social signals would help as
well.

If you're going to be in the crypto space, you'd best begin with developing a
keen sense for power relations and a mind for choosing yours wisely. Otherwise
the blood and tears this ecosystem gets tempered with may be your own.

